# Spiel(ab/ver)lauf

Dungeon World spielen heißt eine Unterhaltung führen; jemand sagt etwas, dann antwortet man, vielleicht schaltet sich noch jemand anderes ein. Wir reden über die Fiktion - die Welt der Charaktere und die Dinge, die um sie herum passieren. Während wir spielen schalten sich die Regeln auch ein. Sie haben etwas über die Welt zu sagen. Es gibt keine Runden oder "dran sein" in Dungeon World, keine Regel legt fest, wer wann etwas sgaen darf. Statt dessen sagt jeder etwas entsprechend dem natürlichen Ablauf der Unterhaltung, was immer eine gewisses hin-und-her einschliesst. Der Sl sagt etwas, die Spieler antworten. Die Spieler stellen Fragen oder machen Feststellungen/Aussagen, der Sl erzählt ihnen was als nächstes geschieht. DW ist niemals ein Monolog; es ist immer eine Unterhaltung. 

Die Regeln helfen dabei, die Spielunterhaltung zu formen. Während sich der SL und die Spieler unterhalten, reden auch die Regeln und die Fiktion miteinander. Jede Regel hat einen bestimmen fiktionalen Auslöser/Anlass/Grund, der darüber Auskunft gibt, wann sie in die Unterhaltung eingreifen sollte.

Wie bei jeder Unterhaltung ist die Zeit, die man mit Zuhören verbringt genauso wichtig wie die Zeit, in der man spricht. Die von den anderen Mitspielern etablierten Details sind wichtig für dich: sie verändern möglicherweise, die Züge, die du machen kannst, eröffnen dir neue Möglichkeiten, oder erschaffen eine Herausforderung, die du durchstehen musst. Die Unterhaltung funktioniert am besten wenn wir alle zuhören, Fragen stellen, und auf den Beiträgen der anderen aufbauen. 

Dieses Kapitel handelt davon, wie man Dungeon World spielt. Hier findest du Informationen über die Regeln - wie sie "aus dem Spiel entstehen" und dazu beitragen. Sowohl allgemeine Regeln, wie etwa einen Zug machen, und speziellere, wie etwa Schaden verursachen und Trefferpunkte werden behandelt.

### Attributwerte und Modifikatoren

Viele der in diesem Kapitel diskutierten Regeln basieren auf Attributen eines Spielercharakters und deren Modifikatoren. Die Attribute sind Stärke, Konstitution, Geschicklichkeit, Intelligenz, Weisheit und Charisma. Sie sind ein maß für die rohe Befähigung einer Spielercharakters auf dem jeweiligen Gebiet auf einer Skala von 3 bis 18, wobei 18 der höchste Wert ist den gewöhnliche Sterbliche erreichen können.

Jedes Attribut hat einen zugehörigen Modifikator, der bei Würfen mit dem Attribut verwendet wird. Die Attribute werden mit drei Buchstaben abgekürzt: Stk, Kon, Ges, Int, Wei, Cha. Die Modifikatoren haben einen Wertbereich von -3 bis +3. Der Modifikator leitet sich vom Atrributswert ab.

## Züge machen

Die Grundeinheit der Regeln in DW ist ein Zug. Eine Zug hat folgende Form:

Wenn du **einen Gegner im Nahkampf angreifst**, wirf+Stk. * Bei 10+, fügst du Schaden zu und weichst dem Gegenangriff aus. Wenn dü möchtest, kannst du dich einem Gegenangriff aussetzen, aber +1d6 Schaden verursachen. *Bei 7-9 fügst zu Schaden zu und der Gegner macht einen Angriff gegen dich.

Züge sind Regeln, die beschreiben, wann sie ausgelöst werden und welchen Effekt sie haben. Ein Zug hängst von einer fiktionalen Handlung ab und hat immer einen fiktionalen Effekt. "Fiktional" heisst, dass Handlung und Effekt aus der Welt der Charaktere stammen, die wir beschreiben. Im obigen Zug ist "einen Gegner im Nahkampf angreifen" der Auslöser/Anstoß. Der Effekt sit wie folgt: ein Wurf wird gemacht und verschiedne fiktionale Effekte basierend auf den Ergebnis des Wurfes.

Wenn ein Spieler beschreibt, wie sein Charakter etwas macht, was einen Zug auslöst, kommt der Zug ins Spiel und seine Regeln werden angewendet. Wenn der Zug einen Wurf erfordert, sagt seine Beschreibung, was für Würfel zu werfen sind und wie man das Ergebnis liest.

Ein Charakter kann nicht die fiktionale Handlung durchführen, die einen Zug auslöst, ohne dass der Zug stattfindet. Wenn zum Beispiel Isaac dem Spielleiter sagt, dass sein Charakter an einen durchgedrehten, äxteschwingenden Ork vorbei zur offenen Tür stürzt/schlüpft/flitzt, so macht er den der Gefahr trotzen Zug, da dessen Auslöser ist "wenn man trotz einer unmittelbaren Gefahr handelt". Issac kann nicht einfach beschreiben wie sein Charakter am Ork vorbeiläuft ohne den derGefahr trotzen Zug zu machen und der kann den der Gefahr trotzen Zug nicht machen wenn er nicht trotz einer unmittelbaren Gefahr oder eines drohenden Unglücks etwas unternimmt. Züge und die Fiktion gegen Hand in Hand.

Jeder am Tisch sollte darauf achten ob gerade ein Zug anzuwenden ist. Sollt es je unklar sein, ob ein Zug ausgelöst wurde, sollten alle zusammenarbeiten um klar zu stellen, was passiert. Stellt Fragen bis jeder die Situation auf die gleich Art und Weise sieht und macht dann einen Wurf, oder auch nicht, je nach dem was die Situation erfordert.

Die vom SL geführten Monster, Nichtspielercharaktere und andere ausgewählte Bestien haben auch Züge, diese funktionieren aber anders.

### Züge und Würfel

Die meisten Züge beinhalten die Formel "wirf+x", wobei x einer der Attributmodifikatoren des Charakters ist (Kon zum Besipiel). Wenn der Zug nicht etwas anderes fordert, bedeutet "wirf" einen Wurf von zwei sechsseitigen Würfeln und die Addition ihrer Augenzahl zum Wert des Modifikators. Bei manchen Würfen wird eine anderer Wert als ein Attributsmodifikator zum Wurf hinzugezählt.

Ich mache einen Zug der mich auffordert wirf+Stk und mein Stärke Modifikator ist +1. Ich würfle zwei sechsseitige Würfel und erhalte eine zwei und eine fünf. Mein Ergebnis ist acht.

Die Resultat fallen in deri Kategorien: Eine Summe von 10 oder höher (10+ geschrieben) ist das beste Ergebnis. Beträgt die summe 7-9, so wurde immer noch ein Erfolg erzielt, aber dieser Erfordert Kompromisse oder kostet etwas. 6 oder weniger bedeutet Ärger, aber man darf auch EP markieren.


Jeder Zug legt fest, was bei 10+ und 7-9 passiert. Die meisten Züge bestimmen nicht was bei 6- passiert, das liegt beim SL aber du darfst immer EP markieren.

Schadenswürfe funktionieren anders. Sie nutzen möglicherweise sogar auch andere Würfeltypen, je nach dem wer oder was Schaden verursacht.

### Züge und Ausrüstung

Die wichtigste Rolle der Ausrüstung eines Charakters is Hilfe bei der der Beschreibung der Züge die diese machen. Ein Charakter irgendeine Waffe kann den Zug Hauen und Stechen in einem Kampf gegen einen Drachen nicht auslösen, da ein Schlag mit der bloßen Faust wohl kaum etwas gegen die zentimeterdicken Schuppen ausricheten kann. Es würde nicht als Auslöser für den Zug zählen.

Genauso kann Ausrüstung einen Zug verhindern. Steile, vereiste Klippen zu erklettern is normaler weise der Gefahr trotzen, aber mit mit einem guten Satz Kletterausrüstung könnte man  die unmittelbare Gefahr und das drohende Unglück vermeiden, das den Zug auslösten würde.

Waffen können am wahrscheinlichsten modifizieren, welche Züge ausgelöst werden können. Ein Charakter mit einem Dolch kann ganz einfach nach den dem Goblin stechen, der an seinem Bein nagt, Hauen und Stechen auslösend, aber der Charakter mit der Hellebarde hat viel grössere Schwierigkeiten diese gegen einen so nahen Gegner einzusetzen.

Objekte und Zeugs aller Art hat Etiketten. Etiketten sind Worte, um Dinge zu beschreiben. Manche Etiketten haben einen spezifischen Effekt auf die Regeln (wie etwa Schadensverminderung durch Rüstung or ein magischer Bonus auf eine bestimmte Art von Zug oder Wert). Andere Etiketten beeinflussen nur die Fiktion (so etwa das Etikett nah, welches die Länge einer Waffe beschreibt und wie nah man einem Feind kommen muss, um ihn angreifen zu können). Etiketten helfen die Handlungen der Charaktere zu beschreiben, wenn Gegenstände benutzt werden und sie geben dem SL Hinweise wie die Objekte die man benutzt schief gehen können oder Komplikationen verursachen können wenn man einen Wurf verfehlt.

### Die Auswirkungen von Zügen

Die Auswirkungen von Zügen betreffen immer die fiktionale Welt, die die Charaktere bewohnen. 10+ bei Hauen und Stechen ziehen nicht bloss irgendwelche mechaniscehn Effekte in Speilsystem nach sich, sodern bdeutet auch, das du etwas erfolgreich angegriffen hast und ihm in irgendeiner Form Schaden zugefügt hast.

Sobald du ausgeknobelt/bestimmt hast was die Auswirkungen eines Zuges sind, wende sie auf die Fiktion an und wende dich dich wieder der Unterhaltung zu. Komme immer wieder auf das, was im Spiel passiert zurück.

Manche Züge haben sofortige mechanische Effekte, wie Schaden verursachen oder jemanden einen Bonus auf den nächsten Wurf zu geben. Diese Auswirkungen sind immer eine wiedergabe der fiktionelen Welt, in der die Charaktere sind; gehe sicher dass die Fiktion zur Beschreibung der auswirkungen von Zügen benutzt wird.

#### Manche Züge…

…benutzen die Formel "Schaden verursachen". Schaden verursachen heisst, dass du die Schadenswürfel deiner Klasse würfelst, manchmal addiert oder subtrahiert deine Waffen zusätzlich Schaden. Man benutzt Schadenswürfel bei jedem Angriff der vernünfigerweise den Gegner verletzen könnte. das heißt normalerweise, das du eine Waffe führst, aber auch deine Fäuste können mit dem richtigen Training oder in den richtigen Umständen Waffen sein.

…sagen "erhalte +1 fürder/voraus". Das heißt, dass du +1 auf deinen nächsten Wurf für einen Zug (nit für Schaden) erhälst. Der Bonus kann größer als +1 sein, oder sogar ein Malus wie etwa -1. Es könnte auch Bedingungen geben, so wie "erhalte +1 voraus für Hauen und Stechen". In diesem Fall darfst du den Bonus nur auf den nächsten Wurf auf "Hauen und Stechen" anwenden, und bei keinen anderen Zug.

…sagen "nimm/erhalte +1 fortlaufend". das heißt, dass du +1 auf alle Würfe, die du für Züge machst, erhälst (nicht bei Schaden). Der Bonus kann größer als +1 sein, oder sogar ein Malus wie etwa -1. es könnte auch eine Bedingung geben, so wie "erhalte +1 fortlaufend auf Volley". Ein fortlaufender Bonus legt auch fest, was dazu führt, dass er endet, wie etwa "bis zu den Spruch beendest" oder "bis du in den Augen deines Gottes Buße getan hast."

…geben dir "Handhabe". Handhabe ist eine Währung die erlaubt, zu einem späteren Zeitpunkt Enstscheidungnen zu machen indem du deine Handhabe ausgibst. Die Handhabe ist an den Zug gebunden, der sie dir gegeben hat, du kannst zum Beispiel weder deine Handhabe von Verteidigen für Fallenexperte ausgeben, noch andersherum.

…stellen dich vor die Wahl. Die Wahl, die du triffst, schreibt wie alle Zugauswirkungen die Dinge vor, die in der Fiktion zusätzlich zu den mechanischen Effekten passieren. Wenn du die Entscheidung triffst, auf 10+ bei Hauen und Stechen mehr Schaden zu verursachen auf Kosten eines möglichen Gegenangriffs, so ist es genau das was deinem Charakter passiert: er hat einen Vorteil errungen, den er nutzen kann um auf der sicheren Seite zu sein oder sein Glück herauszufordern.

…Give you a chance to say something about your character and their history.
When you spout lore you may get asked how you know the information that the GM
reveals. Take that opportunity to contribute to the game and show who your
character really is. Just keep in mind the established facts and don’t
contradict anything that’s already been described.

…geben dir eine Möglichkeit etwas über deinen Charakter und ihre Geschichte zu sagen. Wenn du *Weisheiten kundtust* kann es passieren, dass du gefragt wirst woher du dass Wissen hast, das der SL offenbart. Nimmm diese Gelegenheit wahr zum Spiel beizutragen und zu zeigen wer dein Charakter wirklich ist. Beachte bloss die schon etablierten Fakten, und widerspreche nicht einem Sachverhalt, der schon beschrieben wurde.

…sagen "markiere EP". Das heißt, dass du eins zu der Summe deiner Ep hinzuzählst.

## Verletzungen und Heilung

Schnitte, Prellungen und tötliche Wunden sind die üblichen Gefahren, denen sich abenteurer in DW stellen müssen. Im Laufe des Spiels müssen die Charaktere Schaden einstecken, heilen, oder können auch sterben. Die Gesundheit eines Charakters wird mit seinen Treffenpunkten (TP) gemessen. Schaden wird von den TP abgezogen. Unter den richtigen Bedingungen, oder durch medizinische order magische Hilfe, wird Schaden geheilt und die TP wiederhergestellt.  

### TP

Die TP eines Charakters sind ein Maß seines Stehvermögens, Ausdauer und Gesundheit. Mehr TP bedeuten, dass ein Charakter länger kämpfen kann und mehr Verletzungen ertragen kann bevor er sich seiner Sterblichkeit stellen muss.

Deine Klasse verrät dir deine maximalen TP. Deine Konstitution (das Attribut, nicht der Modifikator) kommt auch ins Spiel, eine höhere Konstitution bedeutet mehr TP. Wenn sich deine Konstitution während des Spiels dauerhaft verändert, passt du auch deine TP an den veränderten Konstitutionswert an. Wenn sich deine Konstitution nicht verändert bleiben auch deine TP gleich.

### Schaden

Wenn ein Carakter Schaden einstecken muss, zieht der den erhalten Schaden den akuellen TP ab. Rüstung reduziert Schaden; wenn ein Charakter eine Rüstung hat zieht man ihren Wert vom Schaden ab. Das kann heißen, das ein Schlag komplett abgelenkt wird - das ist in Ordnung so, dafür ist Rüstung schliesslich da! Schaden kann einen Charakter nie unter 0 TP bringen.

Der Schaden wird vom Angreifer ermittelt. Spieler verursachen Schden abhängig von ihrer Klasse, der verwendeten Waffe und dem Zug, den sie gemacht haben.

Wenn ein Zug bloß "Schden verursachen" anführt so würfelt der Charakter den Schadenswürfel seiner Klasse plus alle Boni oder Abzüge von Zügen, Waffen oder Effekten. Falls ein Zug eine  Menge an Schaden festlegt, benutze diesen anstatt des Schadenswurfes der Klasse.

Monster würfeln mit dem Schadenswert der in ihrer Beschreibung aufgeführt wird. Verwend diesen Schaden immer wenn das Monster etwas macht, was direkt zu Schaden bei jemandem führt, selbst wenn es dabei eine andere Methode als seinen normalen Angriff einsetzt.

Andere Ursachen von Schaden - wie etwa von einem herabfallenden Trümmerstück eines einstürzenden Tirms getroffen zu werden oder in eine Fallgrube stürzen - sind dem Spielleiter basierd auf folgeden Prinzipien überlassen:

* wenn es schlimmstensfalls Kratzer und Prellungen drohen: d4 Schaden
* wenn es bluten könnte, aber nicht schrekliches passiert: d6 Schaden
* Wenn Knochen brechen könnten: d8 Schaden
* wenn eine normale Person daran sterben könnte: d10 Schaden

Füge das Eikett _ignoroert RÜstung_ hinzu wenn die Schadensquelle besonders gross ist oder der Schaden von Gift oder Magie herrührt.

Zeitweise oder von besonderen Umständen verliehener Schutz wirk wie Rüstung die man trägt: 1 Punkt Rüstung für teilweise Deckung, 2 für bedeutende Deckung.

Schaden wird aufgrund der Fiktion ausgeteilt. Züge die Schaden verursachen wie etws Hauen und Stechen sund Spezialfälle dieser Regelung: der Zug legt fest, dass Schaden in Fiktion verursacht wird. Schaden kann zugewiesen werden ohne das ein Zug gemacht wird, falls sich das aus der Fiktion ergibt.

Verlust von Trefferpunkten ist oft nur ein Teil der Auswirkungen. Wenn die Verletzungen sehr  allgemeiner Natur sind, wie der Sturz in eine Grube, ist wahrscheinlich der Verlust von TP alles. Wenn die Verletzung jedoch spezifisch ist, wie wenn ein Ork dir den Arm auskugelt, sollten Tp Teil der Effekte sein, aber nicht alles. Das grössere Problem ist dem dem ausgekugelten Arm umzugehen: wie schwingt man nun ein Schwert oder führt einen Zauber aus? Und wenn einem der kopf abgeschlagen wird ist das kein Verlust von Tp, man ist einfach tot. 

#### Schaden durch mehrere Kreaturen

Nur die mutigsten Monster kämpfen allein. Die meisten Kreaturen kämpfen mit jemandem an ihrer Seite, und vieleicht noch jemand zur Rückendekung und möglicherweise noch ein Bögenschütze, um den Rückzug zu decken und so weiter. Das kann dazu gühren, das mehrere Monster auf einaml Schden austeilen.

Wenn mehr als eine Kreatur auf einmal angreift, wirf die Schadenswürfel für jede der Kreaturen und nimm das höchste Resultat. Falls einige der Kreaturen verscheidene viel Schaden verursachen können, nimm den Schaden mit dem höchsten Potential von allen in den Angriff verwickelten Kreaturen und nimm das höchste Resultat.

_BSP: Ein Goblin Orkaster (d10+1 Schaden, ignorert Rüstung) und drei goblins (d6 Schaden) schleudern alle ihre jeweiliegn Waffen - eine Kugel magischer Säure für den Orkaster, Speere für den Rest - auf Lux, die ihre Barrikade angreift. Ich würfle den den höchsten Schaden, d10+1 ignorert Rüstung, viermal: einemal für den orkaster und je einmal für die anderen Goblins. Ich nehme das höchste Resultat, eine 8, und sage Lux, daß sie 9 Schaden, der ihre Rüstung ignoriert, nimmt als die Säure durch die Risse/Spalten, die die Speere hinterlassen haben dringt._

#### Betäubungsschaden

Betäubungsschaden ist nicht-tötlicher Schaden. ein SC, der Betäubungsschden nimmt trotz der Gefahr um überhapt etwas zu tun, wobei die Gefahr ist "du bist betäubt/benommen". das dauert an, solange es in der Fiktion Sinn ergibt  - du bist benommen bis du die chance hast einen klaren kopf zu bekommen oder zu beseitigen, was dich betäubt. Ein SL Charakter der betäubungschaden nimmt, zieht diesen nicht von seinen TP ab, wird sich aber entsprechend verhalten, herumtaumeln, blindlings herumfummeln usw.


#### Zusätzlicher und Verminderter Schaden

Wenn ein zug dir sagt, dass du zusätzlichen Schaden hinzufügen sollst, addiere diesen Schaden zu dem, den du mit den Schadenwürfeln ermittelt hast. Falls er sagt, Würfel hinzuzufügen (etwa "+1d4 Schaden"), würfelst dü den zusätzlicehn Würfel und zählt das Ergebnis zum Resutat hinzu. 

Das gleiche gilt bei vermindertem Schaden: du ziehst die Zahl vom erwürfelten Ergebnis ab. Wenn du einen Würfel abzihen sollst (etwa "-1w6 Schaden") ziehst du das Resulat dieses Würfels von der ursprünglichen Summe ab. SChaden hat niemals einen negativen Wert - 0 Schaden is das Minimum.

#### Das Beste und Schlechteste

Bei einigen Monstern und Zügen wird mehrmals Schaden ausgewürfelt und entweder das beste oder das schlechteste Ergebnis genommen. Wenn ein Monster seinen w6 Schaden zweimal ermittelt und das beste Resultat nimmt, so wird das b[2w6] geschrieben. Ebenso bedeutet s[3w10] "würfle dreimal mit w10 und wende das schlechteste Resultat an".

### Heilung

Es gibt zwei Quellen der Heilung in DW: medizinischer Beistand und das Vergehen der Zeit.

Medizinischer Besitand, ob magisch oder weltlich/profan/normal, heilt Schaden je nach angewendetem Zug oder Gegenstand. Manche Züge vermögen die TP wieder aufzufüllen, während andere gerade genung heilen, um jemanden während eines Kampfes auf den Beinen zu halten. 

Wenn ein Charakter einige Zeit mit Rasten/erholung/ruhe verbringt, ohne etwas zu tun, was ihre Wunden verschlimmert, so heilen sie. Der Betrag der Heilung ist in den entsprechenden Zügen vermerkt: Lagern für eine Nacht in einer gefährlichen Gegend, Erholen für Aufenthalte in der Zivilisation.

Unabhängig von der Ursache der Heilung können die sich die TP eines Charakters nicht über ihr Maximum hinaus erhöhen.

### Tod

Der Tod lauert am Rande jeder Schlacht. Ein Charakter, der auf 0 TP reduziert worden ist tut sofort seinen letzten Atemzug. Der Tod holt den Gemeinen wie den König gleichermaßen - kein Attribut wird auf den wurf für den letzten Atemzug angwendet. 

Niemand weiß, was jenseits der Schwarzen Tore des Todes liegt, aber man sagt das viele Geheimnisse der sterblichen Welt im Reich des Todes offenbart werden. Wenn du stirbtst, kannst du sie vielleicht erfahren.

Der Tod bietet manchen ein Handel an, manche einfach andere teuer. der Tod ist lauenhaft und mag einen zukünftigen Gefallen oder einen Tribut fordern. Er mag ein Opfer verlangen, oder um etwas Seltames oder scheinbar Harmloses bitten. Niemand kann voraussagen, was dem TOd in den Sinn kommen wird.  

Abhänig von Ausgang des letzen Atemzugs mag sich der Charakter stabilisieren. Ein stabiler Charakter bleibt bei 0 TP, ist aber am Leben und ohne Bewußtsein. Wenn sie geheilt werden, erlangen sie das Bewusstsein zurück und kann sich wieder in den Kampf stürzen oder in Sicherheit bringen. Wenn ein stabiler Charakter erneut Schaden erhält, so muss von neuem seinen letzten Atemzug nehmen und sich wieder dem Tod stellen.  

#### Nach dem Tode

Es ist nicht leicht Abenteurer zu sein - es heißt kalte Nächte in der Wildnis, scharfe Klingen und Monster. Früher oder später wird jemand seinen Geist aufgeben und den langen Marsch zu den schwarzen Toren antreten. Das muss nicht das ende seiner Geschichte sein. Der Tod ist, aud seine eigene Weise, nur eine Neue Herausfordeung, die es zu meistern gilt. Auch tote Abenteurer könen wieder auf(er)stehen. 

If your character dies you can ask the GM and the other players to try and
resurrect you. The GM will tell them what it will cost to return your poor,
dead character to life. If you fulfill the GM’s conditions the character is
returned to life. The Resurrection spell is a special case of this: the magic
of the spell gives you an easier way to get a companion back, but the GM still
has a say.

Falls dein Charakter stirbt, kannst du den SL und die anderen darum bitten, dich wiederbeleben zu laben. Der SL wird dir sagen, was es kosten wird, deinen armen, toten Charakter zurück in Leben zu holen. Wenn du die Bedingunegn

No matter the prospects of resurrection for now you make a new character.
Maybe a hireling becomes a full-fledged adventurer worthy of a whole share and
a part in the real action. Maybe the characters in the party find a new friend
in a steading, willing to join them. Maybe your character had a vengeful
family member who now seeks to take up their blades and spells to make right
what happened. In any case, make your new character as you normally would at
level 1. If your original character returns to life you can play either
character, switching between them as you please (so long as it makes sense).

GM, when you tell the players what needs to be done to bring their comrade
back, don’t feel like it has to derail the flow of the current game. Weave it
in to what you know of the world. This is a great opportunity to change focus
or introduce an element you’ve been waiting to show off. Don’t feel, either,
that it has to be some great and epic quest. If the character died at the end
of a goblin pike, maybe all it takes is an awkward walk home and a few
thousand gold pieces donated to a local temple. Think about the ramifications
of such a charitable act and how it might affect the world. Remember: Death
never forgets a soul stolen from his realm.

### Schwächungen/Beeinträchtigungen/Behinderungen

Losing HP is a general thing, it’s getting tired, bruised, cut, and so on.
Some wounds are deeper though. These are debilities.

**Weak (STR):** You can’t exert much force. Maybe it’s just fatigue and injury, or maybe your strength was drained by magic.

**Shaky (DEX):** You’re unsteady on your feet and you’ve got a shake in your hands.

**Sick (CON):** Something just isn’t right inside. Maybe you’ve got a disease or a wasting illness. Maybe you just drank too much ale last night and it’s coming back to haunt you.

**Stunned (INT):** That last knock to the head shook something loose. Brain not work so good.

**Confused (WIS):** Ears ringing. Vision blurred. You’re more than a little out of it.

**Scarred (CHA):** It may not be permanent, but for now you don’t look so good.

Not every attack inflicts a debility—they’re most often associated with magic,
poison, or stranger things like a vampire sucking your blood. Each debility is
tied to an ability and gives you -1 to that ability’s modifier. The ability’s
score is unaffected so you don’t have to worry about changing your maximum HP
when you’re sick.

You can only have each debility once. If you’re already Sick and something
makes you Sick you just ignore it.

Debilities are harder to heal than HP. Some high level magic can do it, sure,
but your best bet is getting somewhere safe and spending a few days in a soft,
warm bed. Of course, debilities are both descriptive and prescriptive: if
something happens that would remove a debility, that debility is gone.

Debilities don’t replace descriptions and using the established fiction. When
someone loses an arm that doesn’t mean they’re Weak, it means they have one
less arm. Don’t let debilities limit you. A specific disease can have whatever
effects you can dream up. Sick is just a convenient shorthand for some
anonymous fever picked up from a filthy rat.

## Magic

Dungeon World is a fantastic place: there’s more to it than mud, blood, and
ale in the tavern. Fire and wind conjured from the pure elements. Prayers for
health, might, and divine retribution. “Magic” is the name given to those
abilities not derived from the strength of man and beast but from forces
beyond.

Magic means many things. The druid’s ability to take the shape of an animal is
magic, as are the practiced effects of the wizard and the divine blessings of
the cleric. Any ability that goes beyond the physically possible is magical.

### Spells

Some classes, like the cleric and the wizard have access to spells: specific
magical effects that are the benefit of divine servitude or severe study. Each
spell has a name, tags, a level, and an effect.

The basic flow of magic is to know, prepare, cast, and forget a spell.

Known spells are those a spellcaster has mastered enough to prepare. The
cleric knows all cleric spells of their level or lower, including their rotes.
The wizard starts knowing their cantrips and three 1st level spells. When the
wizard gains a level they learn a new spell. The wizard stores their known
spells in their spellbook.

Even if a spellcaster knows a spell, they must have it prepared before they
can cast it. With some time and concentration, as described in the Commune and
Prepare moves, the spellcaster may choose known spells whose total levels are
less than or equal to the caster’s level plus 1 to prepare. The wizard always
prepares their cantrips; the cleric always prepares their rotes. A prepared
spell is ready to be cast.

Casting a spell involves calling on a deity, chanting, waving ones hands,
invoking mystical forces, and so on. To cast a spell you will usually make the
cast a spell move. On a 10+ the spell takes effect, on a 7–9 the caster finds
themself in trouble and must make a choice, but the spell is still cast. Some
spells are ongoing—once they’re cast they continue to have effect until
something ends it.

One option on a 7–9 result is to have the spell revoked or forgotten. A spell
that is revoked or forgotten is still known, but no longer prepared, and
therefore no longer castable. When the caster next Prepares or Communes they
may choose the same spell again.

## Character Change

Dungeon World is ever-changing. The characters change, too. As their
adventures progress, player characters gain experience (XP), which lets them
level up. This prepares them for greater danger, bigger adventures, and
mightier deeds.

Advancement, like everything else in Dungeon World, is both prescriptive and
descriptive. Prescriptive means that when a player changes their character
sheet the character changes in the fiction. Descriptive means that when the
character changes in the fiction the player should change the character sheet
to match.

This isn’t a benefit or detriment to the players or the GM; it’s not an excuse
to gain more powers or take them away. It’s just a reflection of life in
Dungeon World.

Avon, despite being a wizard, has risen to the notice of Lenoral, the deity of
arcane knowledge. After being blessed by an avatar of Lenoral and saying his
vows in the church, Avon is under the deity’s watch. He can fulfill Petitions
and gain boons like a cleric.

Gregor offers his signature weapon, an axe whose green steel is tempered in
orc blood, as a desperate bargain to save King Authen from eternal damnation.
Without his axe he gets none of the benefits of his signature weapon. Should
he recover it he’ll have access to its benefits again.

Descriptive changes only happen when the character has clearly gained access
to an ability. It’s not up to any one player to decide this—if you think a
character qualifies for a new ability, discuss it as a group.

### Level Up

As you play Dungeon World, you’ll be doing three things most of all:
exploring, fighting dangerous foes, and gathering treasure. For each of these
things you’ll be rewarded XP at the end of the session. Acting according to
your alignment and fulfilling the conditions of your alignment moves will
grant you XP at the end of each session as well. If you resolve a bond and
create a new one, you’ll gain XP, too. Any time you roll a 6- you get XP right
away. The GM may have special conditions that you can fulfill to earn XP or
might change the core ones to reflect the world. They’ll let you know before
you play.

When your characters have safety and a chance to rest, they’ll be able to make
the Level Up move to level up and gain new moves.

#### Multiclass Moves

The multiclass moves allow you to gain moves from another class. You get to
choose any move of your level or lower. For the purpose of multiclassing, any
starting class moves that depend on each other count as one move—the wizard's
cast a spell, spellbook, and prepare spells for example. If a move from
another class refers to your level, count your levels from the level where you
first gained a move from that class.

#### Requires and Replaces

Some moves that you gain at higher levels depend on other moves. If another
move is listed along with the word Requires or Replaces you can only gain the
new move if you have the listed move.

A move that requires another move can only be taken if you have the move it
requires already. You then have both moves and they both apply.

A move that replaces another move can only be taken if you have the move it
replaces already. You lose access to the replaced move and just have the new
one. The new move will usually include all the benefits of the replaced one:
maybe you replace a move that gives you 1 armor with one that gives you 2
armor instead.

#### Beyond 10th Level

Once you’ve reached 10th level things change a little. When you have enough XP
to go to 11th level instead you choose one of these:

  * Retire to safety
  * Take on an apprentice
  * Change entirely to a new class

If you retire you create a new character to play instead and work with the GM
to establish your place in the world. If you take on an apprentice you play a
new character (the apprentice) alongside your current character, who stops
gaining XP. Changing classes means keeping your ability scores, race, HP, and
whatever moves you and the GM agree are core to who your character is. You
lose all other class moves, replacing them with the starting moves of your new
class.

## Bonds

Bonds are what make you a party of adventurers, not just a random assortment
of people. They’re the feelings, thoughts, and shared history that tie you
together. You will always have at least one bond, and you’ll often have more.

Each bond is a simple statement that relates your character to another player
character. Your class gives you a few to start with, you’ll replace your
starting bonds and gain new ones through play.

### Resolving Bonds

At the end of each session you may resolve one bond. Resolution of a bond
depends on both you and the player of the character you share the bond with:
you suggest that the bond has been resolved and, if they agree, it is. When
you resolve a bond, you get to mark XP.

A bond is resolved when it no longer describes how you relate to that person.
That may be because circumstances have changed—Thelian used to have your back
but after he abandoned you to the goblins, you’re not so sure. Or it could be
because that’s no longer a question—you guided Wesley before and he owed you,
but he paid that debt when he saved your life with a well-timed spell. Any
time you look at a bond and think “that’s not a big factor in how we relate
anymore” the bond is at a good place to resolve.

If you have a blank bond left over from character creation you can assign a
name to it or write a new bond in its place whenever you like. You don’t get
an XP for doing so, but you do get more defined bonds to resolve in the
future.

### Writing New Bonds

You write a new bond whenever you resolve an old one. Your new bond may be
with the same character, but it doesn’t have to be.

When you write a new bond choose another character. Pick something relevant to
the last session—maybe a place you traveled together or a treasure you
discovered. Choose a thought or belief your character holds that ties the two
together and an action, something you’re going to do about it. You’ll end up
with something like this:

Mouse’s quick thinking saved me from the white dragon we faced. I owe her a
boon.

Avon proved himself a coward in the dungeons of Xax’takar. He is a dangerous
liability to the party and must be watched.

Valeria’s kindness to the Gnomes of the Vale has swayed my heart, I will prove
to her I am not the callous fiend she thinks I am.

Xotoq won the Bone-and-Whispers Axe through trickery! It will be mine, I swear
it.

These new bonds are just like the old ones—use them, resolve them, replace
them.

## Alignment

Alignment is your character’s way of thinking and moral compass. For the
character, this can be an ethical ideal, religious strictures, or maybe just a
gut instinct. It reflects the things your character might aspire to be and can
guide you when you’re not sure what to do next. Some characters might proudly
proclaim their alignment while others might hide it away. A character might
not say, “I’m an evil person,” but may instead say, “I put myself first.”
That’s all well and good for a character, but the world knows otherwise.
Buried deep down inside is the ideal self a person wants to become—it is this
mystic core that certain spells and abilities tap into when detecting
someone’s alignment. Every sentient creature in Dungeon World bears an
alignment, be they an elf, a human, or some other, stranger thing.

The alignments are Good, Lawful, Neutral, Chaotic, and Evil. Each one shows an
aspiration to be a different type of person.

Lawful creatures aspire to impose order on the world, either for their own
benefit or for that of others. Chaotic creatures embrace change and idealize
the messy reality of the world, prizing freedom above all else. Good creatures
seek to put others before themselves. Evil creatures put themselves first at
the expense of others.

A Neutral creature looks out for itself so long as that doesn’t jeopardize
someone else’s well-being. Neutral characters are content to live their lives
and pursue their own goals and let others do the same.

Most creatures are Neutral. They take no particular pleasure in harming
others, but will do it if it is justified by their situation. Those that put
an ideal—be it Law, Chaos, Good, or Evil—above themselves are harder to find.

Even two creatures of the same alignment can come into conflict. Aspiring to
help others does not grant infallibility, two Good creatures may fight and die
over two different views of how to do right.

### Changing Alignment

Alignment can, and will, change. Usually such a change comes about as a
gradual move toward a decisive moment. Any time a character’s view of the
world has fundamentally shifted they can chose a new alignment. The player
must have a reason for the change which they can explain to the other players.

In some cases a player character may switch alignment moves while still
keeping the same alignment. This reflects a smaller shift, one of priority
instead of a wholesale shift in thinking. They simply choose a new move for
the same alignment from below and mention why their character now sees this as
important.

#### Lawful

  * Uphold the letter of the law over the spirit
  * Fulfill a promise of import
  * Bring someone to justice
  * Choose honor over personal gain
  * Return treasure to its rightful owner

#### Good

  * Ignore danger to aid another
  * Lead others into righteous battle
  * Give up powers or riches for the greater good
  * Reveal a dangerous lie
  * Show mercy

#### Neutral

  * Make an ally of someone powerful
  * Defeat a personally important foe
  * Learn a secret about an enemy
  * Uncover a hidden truth

#### Chaotic

  * Reveal corruption
  * Break an unjust law to benefit another
  * Defeat a tyrant
  * Reveal hypocrisy

#### Evil

  * Take advantage of someone’s trust
  * Cause suffering for its own sake
  * Destroy something beautiful
  * Upset the rightful order
  * Harm an innocent

## Hirelings

Hirelings are those sorry souls that—for money, glory, or stranger
needs—venture along with adventurers into the gloom and danger. They are the
foolhardy that seek to make their name as adventurers.

Hirelings serve a few purposes. To the characters, they’re the help. They lend
their strength to the player characters’ efforts in return for their pay. To
the players, they’re a resource. They buy the characters some extra time
against even the most frightening of threats. They’re also replacement
characters, waiting to step up into the hero’s role when a player character
falls. To the GM, they’re a human face for the characters to turn to, even in
the depths of the earth or the far reaches of the planes.

Hirelings are not heroes. A hireling may become a hero, as a replacement
character, but until that time they’re just another GM character. As such
their exact HP, armor, and damage aren’t particularly important. A hireling is
defined by their **Skill** (or Skills) a **Cost** and a **Loyalty** score.

A hireling’s skill is a special benefit they provide to the players. Most
skills are related to class abilities, allowing a hireling to fill in for a
certain class. If you don’t have a ranger but you need to track the assassin’s
route out of Torsea anyway, you need a Tracker. Each skill has a rank, usually
from 1 to 10. The higher the rank the more trained the hireling. Generally
hirelings only work for adventurers of equal or higher level than their
highest skill.

Skills don’t limit what a hireling can do, they just provide mechanics for a
certain ability. A hireling with the protector skill can still carry your
burdens or check for traps, but the outcome isn’t guaranteed by a rule. It
will fall entirely to the circumstances and the GM. Sending a hireling to do
something that is clearly beyond their abilities is asking the GM for trouble.

No hireling works for free. The hireling’s cost is what it takes to keep them
with the player characters. If the hireling’s cost isn’t paid regularly
(usually once a session) they’re liable to quit or turn on their employers.

When hirelings are in play, the players may have to make the Order Hirelings
move. The move uses the loyalty of the hireling that triggered the move:

Hirelings do what you tell them to, so long as it isn’t obviously dangerous,
degrading, or stupid, and their cost is met. **When a hireling find themselves
in a dangerous, degrading, or just flat-out crazy situation due to your
orders** roll+loyalty. On a 10+ they stand firm and carry out the order. On a
7–9 they do it for now, but come back with serious demands later. Meet them or
the hireling quits on the worst terms.

## Making a Hireling

Hirelings are easy to make on the fly. When someone enters the players’ employ
note down their name and what cost they’ve agreed to as well as any skills
they may have.

Start with a number based on where the hireling was found. Hirelings in
villages start with 2–5. Town hirelings get 4–6. Keep hirelings are 5–8. City
hirelings are 6–10. Distribute the hireling’s number between loyalty, a main
skill, and zero or more secondary skills. Starting loyalty higher than 2 is
unusual, as is starting loyalty below 0. Choose a cost for the hireling and
you’re done.

A hireling’s stats, especially their loyalty, may change during play as a
reflection of events. A particular kindness or bonus from the players is worth
+1 loyalty forward. Disrespect is -1 loyalty forward. If it’s been a while
since their cost was last paid they get -1 loyalty ongoing until their cost is
met. A hireling's loyalty may be permanently increased when they achieve some
great deed with the players. A significant failure or beating may permanently
lower the hireling’s loyalty.

### Costs

  * The Thrill of Victory
  * Money
  * Uncovered Knowledge
  * Fame and Glory
  * Debauchery
  * Good Accomplished

### Skills

When you make a hireling, distribute points among one or more of these skills.

#### Adept

An adept has at least apprenticed to an arcane expert, but is not powerful in
their own right. They’re the grad students of the arcane world.

_Arcane Assistance_—When an adept aids in the casting of a spell of lower
level than their skill, the spell’s effects have greater range, duration, or
potency. The exact effects depend on the situation and the spell and are up to
the GM. The GM will describe what effects the assist will add before the spell
is cast. The most important feature of casting with an adept is that any
negative effects of the casting are focused on the adept first.

#### Burglar

Burglars are skilled in a variety of areas, most of them illicit or dangerous.
They are good with devices and traps, but not too helpful in the field of
battle.

_Experimental Trap Disarming_—When a burglar leads the way they can detect
traps almost in time. If a trap would be sprung while a burglar is leading the
way the burglar suffers the full effects but the players get +skill against
the trap and add the burglar’s skill to their armor against the trap. Most
traps leave a burglar in need of immediate healing. If the players Make Camp
near the trap, the burglar can disarm it by the time camp is broken.

#### Minstrel

When a smiling face is needed to smooth things over or negotiate a deal a
minstrel is always happy to lend their services for the proper price.

_A Hero’s Welcome_—When you enter a place of food, drink, or entertainment
with a minstrel you will be treated as a friend by everyone present (unless
your actions prove otherwise). You also subtract the minstrel’s skill from all
prices in town.

#### Priest

Priests are the lower ranking clergy of a religion, performing minor offices
and regular sacraments. While not granted spells themselves, they are able to
call upon their deity for minor aid.

_Ministry_—When you make camp with a priest if you would normally heal you
heal +skill HP.

_First Aid_—When a priest staunches your wounds heal 2×skill HP. You take -1
forward as their healing is painful and distracting.

#### Protector

A protector stands between their employer and the blades, fangs, teeth, and
spells that would harm them.

_Sentry_—When a protector stands between you and an attack you increase your
armor against that attack by the defender’s skill, then reduce their skill by
1 until they receive healing or have time to mend.

_Intervene_—When a protector helps you defy danger you may opt to take +1 from
their aid. If you do you cannot get a 10+ result, a 10+ instead counts as a
7–9.

#### Tracker

Trackers know the secrets of following a trail, but they don’t have the
experience with strange creatures and exotic locales that make for a great
hunter.

_Track_—When a tracker is given time to study a trail while Making Camp, when
camp is broken they can follow the trail to the next major change in terrain,
travel, or weather.

_Guide_—When a tracker leads the way you automatically succeed on any Perilous
Journey of a distance (in rations) lower than the tracker’s skill.

#### Warrior

Warriors are not masters of combat, but they are handy with a weapon.

_Man-at-arms_—When you deal damage while a warrior aids you add their skill to
the damage done. If your attack results in consequences (like a counter
attack) the man-at-arms takes the brunt of it.

## The Adventurer’s Life

Now you know the basics. It’s time you found out what the adventurer’s life is
really like. They say it’s all gold and glory. That’s sometimes true, but
sometimes it also means digging through otyugh waste for a chance at one more
gold coin.

### Dungeons

As an adventurer you’ll spend a lot of time in dungeons. The word “dungeon”
conjures up an image of the stony halls under a castle where prisoners are
kept, but a dungeon is really any place filled with danger and opportunity. A
dragon’s cave, an enemy camp, a forgotten sewer, a sky castle, the very
foundations of the world.

The most important thing to remember when you’re in a dungeon is that it’s a
living place. Just because you cleared the guards out of the entryway doesn’t
mean they won’t be replaced by fresh recruits. Every monster, soldier, or
leader you kill has friends, mates, followers, and spawn somewhere. Don’t
count on anything in a dungeon.

Since dungeons are living places you’d better prepare for the long haul.
Rations are your best friend. Delving into the Hall of Xa’th’al isn’t a day
trip. Once you’re inside your exit might be blocked. Even if you could just
waltz out the time you spend doing it just gives your enemies time to prepare.
Those goblins aren’t tough, but when they have time to rally and prepare
traps…

Speaking of traps—keep your eyes open for them, too. The thief is your best
friend there. They can stop you before you wander into a pit trap or fill the
room with acid. Without one you’re not in dire trouble, but you’re likely to
need to take your time and be extra careful. You can investigate an area by
discerning realities, but you’ll be taking more risks than a skilled thief
would.

When you’re unlucky enough to trigger a trap you might have a chance to get
out of the way, throw up a quick protective spell, or save a friend—most
likely by defying danger. Of course not every trap is so crude as to give you
time to get out of the way. A well-built trap will have a blade in your side
before you even know it’s sprung.

That sounds grim, sure, but it’s not as bad as all that. You’ve got steel,
skills, and spells. If you stick together and keep your wits you’ll make it
out alive. Probably.

### Monsters

The beasts and worse that fill dungeons? We call them monsters.

Not all of them appear monstrous. Sometimes it’s just a guy in some armor—no
horns, flames, or wings, nothing. But when that guy wants to kill you, well,
he’s as much a monster as the rest.

Some don’t even need arms and armor. A wily warlock or nefarious noble can
stab you in the back a dozen times with a word or two. Be wary of anyone who
can stroll around a dungeon with nothing but a robe and a staff: there’s a
reason they don’t need a shell of steel.

When it comes to fighting monsters, it’s an even bet: your life versus theirs.
You should know that going into it. If you can avoid it, never fight with even
odds. Unless you have the advantage you’re probably better off working to gain
that advantage than betting your life on a fight. Find their weaknesses, pad
your advantages, and you’ll live long enough to enjoy the spoils.

Fights often mean triggering moves like hack and slash, defend, or volley.
Defy danger comes up pretty often too, and class moves like cast a spell. The
best fight for you is one where you have the drop—since hack and slash is
triggered by attacking in melee, and a defenseless enemy isn’t really in
melee, the move won’t trigger—you’ll just bury a weapon or spell in their back
and deal your damage.

Monsters generally fall into a few types. Humanoids are more or less like
you—orcs, goblins, and so on. Beasts are animals, but not so docile as Bessie
the cow: think foot-long horns and acid sacs. Constructs are crafted life.
Planar monsters come from beyond this world, from places only dreamed of. The
undead might be the worst of all: that which is dead is damn hard to kill
again.

When you find yourself in a fight with a monster you have a few different
tricks up your sleeve that can help you survive. If the monster’s something
you might know about, you could consult your knowledge and spout lore. It
never hurts to take a minute to look around and discern realities, too—there
might be something helpful nearby that you missed. Make sure you understand
your class moves and how they can help you, too. You never know when a move
might come in handy in a new way.

### Wilderness

There’s dungeons, there’s civilization, and there’s all the stuff in-between:
the wilderness. The line between a forest and a dungeon is thinner than you
might think—have you ever been lost in the night and surrounded by wolves?

Journeys by road are easy. When you’ve got a trail to follow and some modicum
of protection you’re not even making moves—you just consume some rations on
the way and make it to your destination. If it’s a perilous journey though…

On a perilous journey you’ll need a trailblazer, a scout, and a quartermaster.
That means you’ll probably want at least three people when you’re traveling in
dangerous areas. Fewer than three and you’ll be neglecting something—that’s an
invitation for trouble.

### Friends and Enemies

You’re an adventurer, so people will pay attention to you. Not all of that
attention is going to be positive. You’ll find that, especially once you’re
laden down with ancient treasure, all manner of hangers-on will appear from
the woodwork.

Sure, you can get leverage on these people and parley them to get what you
want, but the way to build a lasting connection is to do right by them.
Forcing Duke Alhoro to give you a castle in return for his daughter will get
you the land, but the reputation that comes along with your shady dealing
won’t do you many favors. Coercion isn’t mind control, so play it nice if you
want to make friends.

Magic, though, that just might be mind control. The morality of it’s debatable
but you can bend someone to your will if you don’t mind tossing their free
will in the corner.

It’s worth keeping track of who’s got your back and who’d sooner stab you in
it. The GM will be doing the same, and the worst enemy is the one you don’t
know. You’re not the only ones in Dungeon World with grand designs.

While you live the adventurer’s life, with no fixed address to give, other
folks are likely to be more settled. Knowing where the blacksmith is that does
the best work, or which town’s inns will put you up free of charge, is a fine
thing indeed.

Keep in mind that not all power is physical. Even if you could take down King
Arlon in a fight you’ll just be inviting retribution from his kin, allies, and
court. Station is its own kind of power apart from magic and might.

### The World

You’re an adventurer; you’re a big deal. But there are other forces at work
too. The world will go on without you. If you don’t deal with the goblin
infestation in the sewers maybe someone else will. Or maybe the goblins will
take over the city. Do you really want to find out?

A world in motion is a world waiting to be changed. Your choices of who to
kill (or not), where to go, what bargains to make—it all changes the world
you’re in. Changing the world requires acting on it—making moves and pursuing
treasure and exploration. Change comes in many forms, including XP used to
level up and gain new abilities. Those abilities are then used to go back out
into the world and stir things up. It’s a cycle of change and growth for both
you and the world you live in.

engl 8464 words/
